NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

	OFFICIAL REPORT

Wednesday, 20th March, 1991
The House met at thirty minutes past Two o’ clock.
[Mr Speaker in the Chair]

PRAYERS

PAPERS LAID
The following Papers were laid on the Table:
Kenya Accountants and Secretaries National Examinations Board Report and Accounts for the year ended 30th June, 1986.
Kenya Accountants and Secretaries National Examinations Board Report and Accounts for the year ended 30th June, 1987.
Kenya Reinsurance Corporation—Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1985.
Kenya Reinsurance Corporation—Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1986.
Kenya Post Office Savings Bank—Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1980.
Kenya Post Office Savings Bank—Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1981.
Kenya Post Office Savings Bank—Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1982.
Kenya Post Office Savings Bank—Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1983.
(By the Assistant Minister for Finance (Mr. Keah) on behalf of the Minister for Finance)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. However, I note that the number is smaller than yesterday’s. I know there is a committee, which is busy in the Eastern part of Uganda, but others should be here. I do not know what is happening, even to the Front Bench. I do not know whether they have a meeting, but I have not been informed. Anyway, I welcome you.

I will be adjusting the Order Paper to allow a statement from hon. Baba Diri and an informal question from hon. Banyenzaki. I would also like to take this opportunity to point out that there is something which we as Parliament should take note of and find a solution to. The problem is the road carnage. There are very many deaths on our roads. I think something should be done to curb this because there was an accident in Mabira and another one on Masaka road. I think something has to be done. There must be something wrong. I am not supposed to participate in the debate, but I also own a constituency and I am a citizen who takes advantage of my seat here to point out what is going on. Something should be done. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the issues why the attendance is poor is that in most cases we begin plenary very late, yet you always adjourn this House to 2.00 p.m. Members are always here at 2.00 p.m. but we begin towards 3.00 p.m., so there is need to keep time.

THE SPEAKER: That has no merit, I must say. You mean they went away because we did not start at 2.00 p.m.? When I am in my chambers I watch the attendance here.  

POINT OF ORDER

	Banning of Matatus from Accessing 
	Nairobi CBD

	The Member for Malava (Mr. Shitanda): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I stand to ask for a Ministerial Statement from the Minister for Local Government regarding his decision to ban matatus from accessing the Central Business District (CBD). This decision has left very many commuters inconvenienced, with some of them having to walk five kilometres to their places of work.
	Imagine a situation whereby a commuter from Eastlands is dropped at the City Stadium and his place of work is at Community! This commuter will walk a distance of almost five kilometres to reach his place of work. I would like to know from the Minister what he will do to ensure that his decision does not inconvenience commuters and whether that decision will, indeed, decongest the CBD. Why was his decision selective in the sense that there are some public service vehicles which have been allowed to access the CBD? I would wish him to explain his decision to this House.
	The Vice-President and Minister for Home Affairs (Mr. Musyoka): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I undertake to communicate that concern by the hon. Member to the Minister for Local Government.

	(Mr. Keter stood up in his place)

	Mr. Speaker: Mr. Keter, although you did indicate to me yesterday afternoon that you would seek a Ministerial Statement, you did not come to my office as agreed, to tell me the gist of the Ministerial Statement. So, you cannot ask for it now!
	Next Order!

NOTICE OF MOTION
Release of Game Reserve Land for Public Use
Mr. Galgallo: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to give notice of the following Motion:
That, in view of the continuing rise of the population against the non-increasing land surface and since there have been simultaneous increase in the acreages and number of Game Reserves; this House urges the Government to review the entire structure of wildlife sanctuaries vis-a-vis the population demand for more land and degazette those reserves that are non-viable with a view to releazing more land for public use.

PROCEDURAL MOTIONS
Limitation of Debate: Presidential Address
The Minister for Energy (Mr. N. Biwott): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to move the following Procedural Motion:
That the debate on the Motion of Presidential Address be limited to a maximum of seven days, with not more than ten minutes for each Member speaking excluding the Mover in moving and replying who shall be limited to twenty minutes in either case.

Mr. Speaker, Sir, this is a routine Procedural Motion which we have adopted in all the Sessions in the past and it has served us well. This is the only way we can get some order for ensuring that every hon. Member gets an opportunity to contribute on this important Presidential Address.

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, Sir, I would like to commend this Procedural Motion to the hon. Members and I beg to move.
The Minister for Regional Development (Mr. Midika): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I stand to second this Motion. Mr. Speaker, Sir, since this is a Procedural Motion, perhaps we should not dwell on it very much when we have other very important issues coming on. Therefore, I want to take the shortest possible time possible to second the Motion.

(Question proposed)
(Question put and agreed to)

Limitation of Debate: private Members Motions
The Minister for Energy (Mr. N. Biwott): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to move the following Procedural Motion:
That the debate on Private Member’s Motions shall be limited in the following manner:
A maximum of two hours with not more than 20 minutes for the Mover, 20 minutes for the Government official Responder and 10 minutes for each other Member speaking, and that 10 minutes before the time expires the Mover be called upon to reply.

Mr. Speaker, Sir, like the previous Procedural Motion, this is, indeed, the Motion we have been relying on in the past on all the Private Members Motion which normally take place on Wednesdays. Here it is provided that at least two hours be allowed for the Motion; 20 minutes for the Mover to move the Motion; 20 minutes for the Government to reply to it, and ten minutes later on for the Mover to reply and for every other Member, ten minutes. I think this has been adequate in the past because I have never had any complaint and because of that I do commend this Motion to this hon. House.

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to move.

The Minister for Public Works (Mr. Mibei): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I rise to second this Motion. This Motion will afford Members enough time to air their views.

With those few remarks, I beg to second.

(Question proposed)

Mr. Wasike-Ndombi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I know that this is a Procedural Motion, but you will have noticed that this House is composed of two sides: the Front-benchers and the Back-benchers and this is the only Motion that gives Back-benchers time to express their view in this House.
Other than that I am absolutely sure that there is complete harmony between the Front-bench and the Back-bench and we are committed to serving this country in the true spirit of Nyaoism.
With these few remarks, I beg to move.
(Question put and agreed to)


ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
No. 332
Bitumenization of Arabia Airstrip
Mr. Aden asked the Minister for Transport and Communication—
(a)	why the Ministry has abandoned the work of bituminizing the Arabia Airstrip after having done the project half-way in 1978; and
(b)	when this work will be completed.
The Assistant Minister for Transport and Communications (Dr. Momanyi): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to reply.
(a) The Arabia Airstrip is of gravel surface, and that is how it was intended to be. At no time has any bitumen work ever been undertaken in 1978 and stopped, as the question implies. The airstrip was last graded in June, 1988.
(b) According to the Ministry’s current Development Plan there is no provision to bituminize Arabia Airstrip.
Mr. Aden: Arising from the reply given by the Assistant Minister, is he denying the fact that the Mandera District Development Committee (D.D.C.) recommended bituminization of this particular airstrip way back in 1977? What did the Ministry do about that recommendation of the D.D.C.?
Dr. Momanyi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, it is not always that the Minisry goes by the recommendations of the D.D.C. This is because to build an airstrip, you must look at various things. I want to inform the House now that there is no sufficient volume of traffic for the Arabia Airstrip. Already, in Mandera District, we have bituminized airstrips at El Wak, El Rhamu and Mandera.
Mr. Aden: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am amazed by the reply given by the Assistant Minister. It is the people who live in the area who know what the airstrip is like. Now the basis of development is the recommendation of the D.D.C. Now that the Assistant Minister says that they abide by the recommendations of the D.D.C., does he imply that his Ministry is better placed to know about the place than the inhabitants of Arabia?
Dr. Momanyi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I said it is not always that the Ministry goes by the recommendations of the D.D.C. Hon. Aden should have understood that. However, let me now give the statistical figures which come form the Directorate of Civil Aviation (D.C.A.).
(…)
Mr. Aden: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Sir. I do not know how the Assistant Minister wants an airstrip that is unfinished to be used by an aircraft. Is he aware that various officials who fly out of Nairobi, and who want to visit particular projects in that division, land at Mandera Airstrip, which is 35 miles away and then drive by road because there is no serviceable landing airstrip?
Dr. Momanyi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, the airstrip has been maintained regularly. It was last graded in 1988. I would like to inform the hon. Member that gravel surface, if it has a strong foundation and is well-maintained, can be used by aircraft of a certain weight.
Mr. Speaker: Next question.

No. 29
Control on Nyando Floods
Mr. Miruka-Owuor: Mr. Speaker, Sir, the House will recall that last Thursday hon. Members supported my Motion on floods in Nyando as a matter of national importance and the Government promptly accepted the Motion and took action. In view of this, apart from recording the appreciation of the people of Nyando and Kisumu District for the humane response and prompt action on the part of the Government, I seek the leave of this august House to withdraw the question. I also thank the hon. Members of this House for supporting the Motion.
The Assistant Minister for Lands and Housing (Mr. Mutiso): On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, Sir. Is the hon. Member really not out of order to interrupt the questions? We were already on Question No. 29, which is the third question on the Order Paper. If the hon. Member was standing on a point of order, this should have come immediately after question time. Is this the time to do so?
Mr. Speaker: Mr. Miruka-Owuor, what would you like to tell the House about this question?
Mr. Miruka-Owuor: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I was explaining the background of the question and I am now seeking the leave of the House to withdraw——
Mr. Speaker: Are you asking your question or not?
Mr. Miruka-Owuor: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am seeking the leave of the House to withdraw the question because it has been overtaken by events.
Mr. Speaker: Okay, thank you very much.
(Question withdrawn)
Mr. Speaker: Mr. Kibugi’s question. 
No. 15
Grading Diffathus–Ngucwi Road
Mr. Kibugi asked the Minister for Public Works—
(a)	when the road from Diffathus Market–Kajiji to Ngucwi was last graded; and,
(a)whether he could consider murraming the said road.
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I request the House to allow me more time to get a satisfactory reply.
Mr. Speaker: Okay
Mr. Aden: On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, Sir. The Questioner had asked this question earlier on but there was no one to answer him from the Ministry. Is the Minister in order to reply to it now without first apologizing to the Chair for being late?
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I have been trying to do something in order to finish up with this question and for that matter I was not deliberately late. I was only trying to make sure I give the hon. Questioner the right answer.
Mr. Kibugi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, may we know from the Minister when we should expect an answer to the question? Is it this week, next week or when?
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I hope I will be able to answer this question tomorrow.
Mr. Mwamzandi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I think it is among our procedures in that when a question has been asked and the Minister is not there to reply when he later on comes to reply, on that same day, he apologizes to the Chair and the House. The Minister has not apologized, and we need an apology from him.
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I apologize for coming late; but there will be a good answer.
Mr. Speaker: Can we now move on to Questions by Private Notice.
(Question deferred)

QUESTION BY PRIVATE NOTICE
Kenyan Truck Drivers Stranded in Uganda
Mr. Kiliku: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation the following Question by Private Notice:
(a)	Is the Minister aware that some Kenyan drivers carrying relief food to Sudan have been stranded in the Republic of Uganda?
(b)	What  has happened to the drivers who are allegedly missing, and what action is he taking to have those stranded there releazed?
(c)	What further action is the Minister taking to ensure that safety of those Kenyan truck drivers is guaranteed?
The Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation (Mr. Obure): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to reply.
(a)	I would like to state from the outset that the Kenya Government is very concerned about the security and the welfare of Kenyans wherever they may be. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation is aware that Kenyan drivers carrying relief food destined for Southern Sudan have been stranded in Uganda. The Kenyan High Commission is in constant touch with the Ministry regarding the plight of these drivers. The Ministry is also in touch with employers who were contracted by the World Food Programme to ferry the relief supplies to Southern Sudan. About 70 trucks were stranded in Masindi, Uganda and another 30 in Kampala. Through the efforts of our High Commission in Kampala, all truck in Masindi were off-loaded and the trucks and their drivers are now back in Kenya. There are now only 23 trucks in Kampla belonging to Inter-truck Transport Company which are being off-loaded right now but the trucks and the drivers will be back in Kenya not later than the end of this week.
(….)
Mr. Obure: Mr. Speaker, Sir, our Government has been very sympathetic in the past because we have been considering the other social aspect, like the fact that these businessmen were transporting food supplies to people who are starving and dying of hunger in Southern Sudan. For that reason, we could not consider banning these operations. We still cannot do so, and if some Kenyans feel that they should proceed to Sudan, it is up to them to take that risk. As I have already said, we have appealed to transporters and other Kenyans, who are travelling to those areas, to seriously consider security questions involved. Therefore, we are advising them against it, but if they wish to venture into that dangerous business, I do not think that we can categorically state here that we are prepared to ban the movement of vehicles into those areas.
Inadequacy of 1988 University Admissions
Mr. Munyi: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to ask the Minister for Education the following Question by Private Notice:
(a)Is the Minister aware that over 10,000 students who qualified to join various Universities in 1987 have not been admitted?
(b)What urgent measures is the Minister taking to ensure that these students are offered places at the universities?
The Assistant Minister for Education (Mr. M’Maitsi): Mr. Speaker, Sir, at this time I do not have the full answer to this question and therefore, I beg the House to give me more time so that I can give the full answer tomorrow.
Mr. Munyi: On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, Sir. The Assistant Minister has said that he will give the answer tomorrow. Will he do that during the morning or afternoon Sitting, because there will be two Sittings tomorrow?
Mr. Speaker: I think the most important thing is for the House to get the correct reply. That is paramount.
(Question deferred)

Repair of Nginyang Bridge
Mr. Twarith: Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to ask the Minister for Public Works the following Question by Private Notice:
(a)	Is the Minister aware that Nginyang Bridge in Baringo East has been rendered impassable due to the current floods?
(b)	What urgent action is he taking to repair the bridge?
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to reply.
(a)I am sure that the Nginyang Bridge in Baringo East has been rendered impassable due to the blockage of the inlets by large logs which were brought by the flooded river and water is flowing over the bridge.
(b)My Ministry has already sent personnel to the site in order to unlog the inlets. The work will involve cutting the logs using a power saw, and then removing them from the river. It is hoped that the work will be completed within this month if there are no further interruptions by floods.
Mr. Twarith: Mr. Speaker, Sir, the Minister has answered the Question properly, but may I know what steps he is going to take on the other bridge because there are two bridges, Nginyang and Kapedo? There is only one bus which transports students and teachers to their various schools. Right now they are still stranded at Nginyang Health Centre. We need people who can work very fast.
Mr. Munyi: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Sir. Arising from that answer from our very good Minister for Public Works, may we know from him whether he can appeal, through the Government, to the Kenya Army Engineering Unit to assist in repairing this bridge? Just as they are doing now in airlifting food to areas which have been hit by famine—he can appeal to them to assist in repairing because this is an emergency.
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, it is not only in this particular area where we have a problem; we have problems all over the country. Everything is being done within the means of the Ministry and the Government to ease the problem of transportation. I do hope that the hon. Member will understand the situation. We are having rains which cannot be compared with the rains that we have had for some time. We have not had rains of this magnitude. So, we are trying to cope up with the situation which we had not foreseen.


COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
(Order for Committee read being the 14th Allotted Day)
MOTION
That, Mr. Speaker do now Leave the Chair
Vote 16—Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife
(Minister for Tourism and Wildlife on 25th October, 1988)
(Resumption of Debate interrupted on 25th October, 1988)
The Assistant Minister, Office of the President (Mr. Keen): Thank you Mr. Speaker, Sir, for  giving me this opportunity to associate myself with the remarks that have already been made by the other hon. Members in congratulating the Minister for Tourism and Wildlife. A lot was said by Members who spoke yesterday against poaching. Poaching is not something new. It is something which has been going on since our late President, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, banned hunting in 1977. It has taken Kenya 18 years to eliminate 14,000 elephants. It is a question of simple arithmetic to find out how long it would take to eliminate the remaining 20,000 elephants. Within the next nine years, we might probably not have any elephants left this country if this lunacy of poaching is not arrested immediately.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to raise issues of great concern about the people of Koboko. The issues are the outbreak of Meningitis, and the water crisis in Koboko District. In mid January 2007 there was an outbreak of Meningitis in Lobule sub-county in Koboko District. Within a matter of days the Meningitis spread like bushfire throughout the district of Koboko and even the whole West Nile. I understand it even spread to Karamoja and Kotido. The records are now in the Health Centre IV show that there 349 persons infected with Meningitis cumulatively, and 19 have already died, leaving alone those who have died at their homes. I am sure the number is greater.



THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The statement has been made but I do not know – maybe the Leader of Government Business – the Minister of Defence will have to alert -(Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe my colleagues will be coming in due course, but given the importance of the statement our colleague has made, I think it will require a well prepared response from the Minister of Health. However, let me confirm that there has been an epidemic of meningitis, which has spread to the Karamoja region and now in the West Nile area. 

MR WOPUWA: I was wondering what has happened to our ministers, they are very few in front, Mr Speaker!

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, this morning there were many committees, as colleagues know, which were sitting and many of them finished late. I believe in the course of time some more ministers will come to the House.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
Repair of Roads Damaged by Floods
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. J. K. arap Koech): On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, Sir.
My point of order, is in connection with the current floods and a few distorted stories which have been appearing in the newspapers. I would like to make a ministerial statement to clarify the position. On Monday, 9th May, 1988, the Daily Nation carried some distorted stories in one of its articles.
As far as the problems which have been caused by the floods on the roads and bridges are concerned, the Ministry is taking very serious steps because we do not want Wananchi to suffer.
The 1988 long rains, which are still falling countrywide, have cause considerable interruptions to the road transport network in all the districts throughout the country. Many bridges, culverts and drifts have been either over-topped or washed away by the raging water torrents. Many human lives and property have, unfortunately, been lost in the floods or in swollen rivers when people take risks and attempt to cross them. In some cases where roads have been cut off, they have become muddy and slippery and hence rendered impassable by vehicles.



Repair of Roads Damaged by Floods
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. J. K. arap Koech): On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, Sir.
My point of order, is in connection with the current floods and a few distorted stories which have been appearing in the newspapers. I would like to make a ministerial statement to clarify the position. On Monday, 9th May, 1988, the Daily Nation carried some distorted stories in one of its articles.
As far as the problems which have been caused by the floods on the roads and bridges are concerned, the Ministry is taking very serious steps because we do not want Wananchi to suffer.
The 1988 long rains, which are still falling countrywide, have cause considerable interruptions to the road transport network in all the districts throughout the country. Many bridges, culverts and drifts have been either over-topped or washed away by the raging water torrents. Many human lives and property have, unfortunately, been lost in the floods or in swollen rivers when people take risks and attempt to cross them. In some cases where roads have been cut off, they have become muddy and slippery and hence rendered impassable by vehicles.
The Ministry’s officers are continuously taking stock of damage occasioned by the current rains. But since the rains are continuing in different parts of the country and the damages vary from place to place depending on the intensity of the rain, the Ministry is not in a position to precisely state, at this moment in time, the magnitude and scope of the damages which have taken place. However, preliminary reports which have been received from the districts indicate that the Ministry shall require a sum of approximately 4 million for the reinstatement of the flood damages which have taken place so far.
Once again, I would like the Ministry to take note of the remarks made yesterday by Hon. ole Ntimama that the trainees to Utalii College must also be considered and selected from those disadvantaged areas like Narok, Kajiado and Samburu so that at least they too would feel part and parcel of this nation.
With those few remarks, I beg to support.
(Applause)
Mr. Salat: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Sir, for allowing me to join my colleagues in contributing to this very important Vote. First of all, I wish to congratulate the able Minister for Tourism and Wildlife for the able manner in which he moved this very important Vote. When we talk of tourism, we talk of a very, very important sector in the economy of this country. Tourism is an industry which earns this country a great deal of foreign exchange. It is a sector that gives employment opportunities to very many young Kenyans; it is also a sector that projects the image of this country beyond our borders. While we appreciate the efforts being made by the Ministry in terms of tourism promotion within this country and outside the country, the Ministry should go into great lengths in advertising our tourist attractions in the country to enable this country get a lot of foreign exchange and also expand employment opportunities that exist at the moment. Tourism is one sector whose importance cannot be over-emphasized. It is just like any other sector of our economy, for instance, the agricultural sector, and it plays a great role in promoting this country’s image outside our borders.
With those few remarks, I beg to support.
The Assistant Minister for Education (Mr. Cheruiyot): Thank you very much for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Motion on the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife’s financial estimates.
First of all, I would like to pay tribute to the Minister for Tourism and Wildlife who has ably moved this Motion, and showed us a broad aspect of what he intends to do with this meagre amount of money. In my opinion, I think he should ask for a bigger amount. The Minister, in fact, pointed out from the very outset that this is a very sensitive Ministry. It is a Ministry which touches on so many things. It is a Ministry which enables us to obtain the hard wanted foreign currency. I, therefore, feel that the Minister should be asking for much more money for the Recurrent and Development Estimates.
I would also like to pay very special tribute to His Excellency the President who has, in fact, championed the idea of conservation of indigenous trees and wildlife.
[Mr. Speaker, left the Chair]
[Madam Temporary Deputy Speaker (Mrs. Ndetei) took the Chair]
Madam Temporary Deputy Speaker, very often his Excellency the President has, in fact, told us that when we conserve the indigenous forests, we keep butterflies and birds which, in fact, attract very many tourists. His excellency the President has gone out of his way to be the first conservationist of our environment. By encouraging the conservation of forests and wildlife, he is, in fact attracting tourists.
QUORUM
Mr. Miruka: On a point of order, Madam Temporary Deputy Speaker, is there a quorum in the House?
The Temporary Deputy Speaker (Mrs. Ndetei): No, we do not have a quorum. Ring the Division Bell.
(The Division Bell was rung)
The Temporary Deputy Speaker (Mrs. Ndetei): There is now a quorum. Continue, Mr. Muhoho.
The Minister for Tourism and Wildlife (Mr. Muhoho): As I was saying, Madam Temporary Deputy Speaker—and I am glad to see that hon. Mang’oli is back—I do hope that they will help us in that respect to be able to ensure that the other necessary infrastructures are taken care of.
Finally, I would like to assure hon. Bidu that we promote tourism, we promote our facilities, we want them to come to our beaches and also come and watch the elephants. That is the only kind of tourism that we would want to promote. I would like to assure him that there is no medical evidence anywhere that one can contract the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) by either watching anybody on the beach or watching elephants.
With those few remarks, I beg to move.
(Question put and agreed to)
[The Temporary Madam Deputy Speaker (Mrs. Ndetei) left the Chair]
IN THE COMMITTEE
[The Temporary Madam Deputy Chairman (Mrs. Ndetei) took the Chair]
Vote 16—Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife
The Minister for Tourism and Wildlife (Mr. Muhoho): Madam Temporary Deputy Chirman, I beg to move:
That a sum not exceeding  6,318,135 be issued from the Consolidated Fund to complete the sum necessary to meet expenditure during the year ending 30th June, 1989 in respect of:
Vote 16—Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife
(Question proposed)
RECURRENT ESTIMATES
Sub-Vote 160—General Administration and Planning
(Heads 530 and 557 agreed to)
(Sub-Vote 160 agreed to)
(Sub-Vote 161—Tourism Services)
(Heads 535, 536, 538, 539, 540 and 541 agreed to)
(Sub-Vote 161 agreed to)
Sub-Vote 163—Wildlife Conservation and Management Services
(Heads 531, 533, 534, 537, 542, 544, 556, 558, 573, 574 and 575 agreed to)
(Sub-Vote 163 agreed to)
DEVELOPMENT ESTIMATES
Sub-Vote 160—General Administration and Planning
Mr. Angatia: Madam Temporary Deputy Chairman, I would like to get clarification from the Minister with regard to Item 432, Swiss Grant to Kenya Utalii College. I would expect this to be shown under the Appropriations-in-Aid, which is from the Swiss Government to our Government, but now it says that it is Swiss Grant to Kenya Utalii College. It is given as direct payment to Kenya Utalii College. I am wondering for what purpose it is given because I thought the Swiss had already finished building this college and now we run it by ourselves.

Mr. Angatia: Would that then come under Recurrent Estimates or would it come under Development Estimates?
The Minister for Tourism (Mr. Muhoho): Besides that, we hope that we will be able to buy some extra equipment, language laboratory and also a mobile van for training purposes.
(Head 530 and 557 agreed to)
(Sub-Vote 160 agreed to)
Sub-Vote 161—Tourism Services
(Head 535 agreed to)
(Sub-Vote 161 agreed to)
Sub-Vote 163—Wildlife Conservation and Management Services
Mr. Angatia: Madam Temporary Deputy Chairman, I would like to get clarification from the Minister with regard to Head 531, Item 432, Grant to Wildlife Department. Who is giving a grant to Wildlife Department? I am asking this questions this heading is under Wildlife Departmental Headquarters and thus I do not know what this grant to Wildlife Department means.

BILLS
First Reading
The Cotton Bill
(Order for First Reading read—Read the First Time—Ordered  to be read the second Time tomorrow)
Second Reading
The National Construction Corporation (Repeal) Bill
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. J. K. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that the National Construction Corporation (Repeal) Bill be now read a Second Time.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, we all know that of late the National Construction Corporation has faced a lot of problems, which have necessitated the Government to take action to liquidate the corporation. The Corporation was established by the Government, through an Act of Parliament—Chapter 493 of the Laws of Kenya. The functions of this particular corporation were as follows: to promote, assist and develop the construction industry; engage in the construction industry; manufacture or deal in plans, tools, materials, machinery and equipment used in connection with the construction industry; to establish, equip and maintain educational and training establishment for the benefit of those in employment in the construction industry and to furnish managerial, technical and administrative advice to those in the construction industry.
Since 1972, however, the corporation has not fulfilled the objectives it was intended to fulfill. Over the years, the National Construction Corporation did not work efficiently. In the process, it had made the Government to incur a lot of losses.
With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to move.
The Attorney-General (Mr. Muli): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to second this Bill. In doing so, I would like to tell this House that the exercise we are about to undertake is to undo what this House did some ten or so years ago. What this House did then, was to feel happy to create a baby by the name of the National Construction Corporation. Having created that baby as a statutory body, the Government, or the parent, tried to give it certain jobs and also gave it a monopoly of those jobs by protecting it. However, that monopoly did not work well because perhaps the competition was not sufficient or the protection by the parent was not adequate and so that monopoly misfired. As a result the child monopoly had to be wound up because of liabilities owed to other creditors and to the Government. Unlike what we would do in a limited liability company whereby we would wind it up by way of liquidation appointment of a receiver or a liquidator to collect the assets, sell them and pay the creditors, this exercise could not be done that way. In that case we had to come to this House and then undo what we did in 1972. It is a painful thing this House is to do, but it is obliged to do so because there is no other way to wind up the activities of the corporation because it is not a limited liability company.

With those few words, I beg to second.
(Question proposed)
The Assistant Minister for Livestock Development (Mr. Kisiero) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Sir, for giving me an opportunity to support the Minister who has moved the National Construction Corporation (Repeal) Bill.
Of course, Mr. Speaker, Sir, it is a great pity that an institution that has been well conceived, planned and implemented has has to fall by the wayside. It has done so principally because of mismanagement. An organisation of this size could not just have been brought up if there had not (…)
Mr. Speaker, Sir, with those few remarks, I beg to support the Bill.
Mr. Speaker: Order! That was a point of information and not a point of order. You have been here long enough, Mr. Chepkok, to know that.
The Assistant Minister for Lands and Housing (Mr. Mutiso): Mr. Speaker, Sir, Hon. Chepkok is not a new hon. Member in this House. He should, therefore, know better what a point of order is. What he is trying to advance is just a point of argument or, rather, he is trying to give a piece of advice. I am not against that. 
Mr. Chepkok: On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, Sir. The Speaker is here to tell me what to do. However, Hon. Mutiso should not tell me I am not on a point of order, or that I am on a point of information. He should address the Chair, not me. 
[Mr. Speaker left the Chair]
[The Temporary Deputy Speaker (Mr. Kabingu-Muregi) took the Chair]
The Temporary Deputy Speaker (Mr. Kabingu-Muregi): Bw. Chepkok, Bw. Spika amekwambia umekuwa hapa kwa muda mrefu na kwa hivyo huwezi kufanya ulivyofanya. Hon. Mutiso, you should address the Chair when you think the hon. Member is wrong. I think you are completely out of order.

Mr. Angatia: Mr. Temporary Deputy Speaker, Sir, I did not say that I did not make this remark. I repeat that if this institution was set up to help upcoming Africans build themselves up and come into this industry, now that we are removing it we are leaving a gap for non-indigenous companies to take over and fill up this responsibility. What am I supposed to substantiate here?
(Laughter)
The Assistant Minister for Lands and Housing (Mr. Mutiso): How are we leaving the gap?

Mr. Angatia: Mr. Temporary Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to draw the attention of the Minister to page 2, sub-clause (8), of the Bill. One hon. Member referred to it but I would also like to draw the attention of the Minister to ti. If says as follows:
“Every member of the staff of the Corporation not under notice of dismissal shall under written law…”
The part I am interested in is:
“…under the Corporation and employment with the Corporation and in the public service shall be deemed for all purposes to be a single continuing employment.”
In this country parastatals are the best employers. Between private companies and the Government corporations offer the best terms of service. This is because one is assured of the job, and they pay very well—better than the Civil Service, and also one’s job is assessed as a Government job. Here we are going to take a group of people—I do not know whether they are 281 or 291—and add them to the Ministry. Are they going to be on different terms and are they going to carry their terms of service? The Bill says they are going to carry their terms of service with them…
The Minister for Labour (Mr. Okondo): Thank you, Mr. Temporary Deputy Speaker, for your ruling which is very apt. I am sure we will be able to debate the better.
I was saying that the abolition of the National Construction Corporation will help to plug a hole through which the public were losing funds. Whether inadvertently or not, the fact is that the money which was being put in the corporation was not achieveing its targets, and the targets of the corporation are spelt out in the Act. If the corporation had achieved its target, perhaps——

BILLS
First Reading
The Cotton Bill
(Order for First Reading read—Read the First Time—Ordered  to be read the second Time tomorrow)
Second Reading
The National Construction Corporation (Repeal) Bill
The Minister for Public Works (Mr. J. K. arap Koech): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that the National Construction Corporation (Repeal) Bill be now read a Second Time.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, we all know that of late the National Construction Corporation has faced a lot of problems, which have necessitated the Government to take action to liquidate the corporation. The Corporation was established by the Government, through an Act of Parliament—Chapter 493 of the Laws of Kenya. The functions of this particular corporation were as follows: to promote, assist and develop the construction industry; engage in the construction industry; manufacture or deal in plans, tools, materials, machinery and equipment used in connection with the construction industry; to establish, equip and maintain educational and training establishment for the benefit of those in employment in the construction industry and to furnish managerial, technical and administrative advice to those in the construction industry.
(...)
So, Mr. Speaker, Sir, in short, the Bill is a noble one. The functions of the corporation are not being thrown out; but I repeat that next time we are looking at the creation of a corporation we will have to be a little more careful and try not to give a monopoly, as we did in this case unwittingly only to find out that at the end of the day there is such a liability that the  parent Ministry will have to take over from its baby.
With those few words, I beg to second.
(Question proposed)
The Assistant Minister for Livestock Development (Mr. Kisiero) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Sir, for giving me an opportunity to support the Minister who has moved the National Construction Corporation (Repeal) Bill.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

Clause 1, agreed to.

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.28
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume so that the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.29
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” and has passed it without amendment. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.30
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House, which I have just given be adopted by this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.31
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2006”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work we have just completed. This process will be concluded tomorrow in the afternoon. The House is adjourned to tomorrow afternoon. Please come back tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.


ADJOURNMENT
The Temporary Deputy Speaker (Mr. Kabingu-Muregi): It is now time for the interruption of business. The House is, therefore, adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, 11th May, at 9.00 a.m. 
The House rose at thirty minutes
 past Six o’clock.



